<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>
			<p>The long train rumbled and swayed, whistle blowing intermittently, screeching discordantly, past smoky factory and office buildings, through rows of one-storied, two- or three-room cottages, outside which on hard packed clay earth played here tow-headed white children or there black or brown or yellow ones. It plunged suddenly into cavernous darkness under a bridge, thick acrid smoke pouring into the open windows of the wooden coaches.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúUnion Station‚ÅÝ‚ÄîAtlanty. All out for Atlanty,‚Äù bawled a grinning Negro porter as the train rolled into a long, dingy shed with low-hung roof. Eager, laughing Negroes matched boxes and bundle: of varied shapes from the racks over the seats or pulled mates to them from under the seats. Mimi awoke with a start as Jean shook her gently.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe‚Äôre there, <i xml:lang="fr">petite</i> Mimi,‚Äù he told her. Through the throng, peering vainly through the murky air, redolent of stale banana and orange skins and of bodies in need of washing, she made her way to remove the worst of the soot and grime from her face.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy father‚Äôll be here to meet us,‚Äù Mary told Jean.</p>
			<p>Though he disliked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson intensely Jean was happy to receive the news. He felt bewildered, lost, a malady bordering on nausea at the hubbub around him. Methodically he obeyed his wife‚Äôs commands to gather their bags and parcels. Then with Mimi, refreshed, alert, her weariness dropped from her as she would have discarded a cape, they made their way out of the coach in the van of the surging throng.</p>
			<p>Incisive <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson kissed Mary and Mimi brusquely, shook hands with Jean and hustled them through the waiting room labeled ‚ÄúFor Coloured‚Äù to the sidewalk where a horse-drawn surrey was waiting. ‚ÄúNo‚ÅÝ‚ÄîNo,‚Äù shouted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson as the driver started down the street. ‚ÄúGo around by Pryor Street and from there down Auburn Avenue.‚Äù To the Daquins he explained: ‚ÄúIf he‚Äôd gone that way he‚Äôd have carried you through Decatur and Ivy Streets‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs the slum district‚ÅÝ‚Äîsaloons and houses‚Äù He paused significantly, looking at Mimi. ‚ÄúPretty bad,‚Äù he added. ‚ÄúLowest kind of Negroes.‚Äù But Mimi did not hear him nor even the newsboy who ran alongside the cab shouting: ‚ÄúExtry! All about the Japs licking the Rooshians! All about th‚Äô big battle!‚Äù Because it was terra incognita to her she tried to see everything as eagerly as she had watched the land from the car window in the long ride from New Orleans. Spring was in the air. The cab, to the accompaniment of various cluckings, ‚Äúgid-daps,‚Äù ‚Äúgo-long-theres‚Äù of the ancient driver, joggled and bounced over the Belgian block pavement. Mimi sniffed the air eagerly, anticipatorily.</p>
			<p>The carriage rumbled and jerked through the ghostly confines of shut business houses, turned into Auburn Avenue lined with blowzy boarding houses, their porches lined with men and women, a loud, staccato, mirthless laugh occasionally floating on the breeze. Soon the scene changed. Black and brown and yellow faces replaced the white, the laughs became more frequent, more rich, more spontaneous. The April evening seemed more filled with the sheer joy of living. To Mimi the sudden change was pleasant, warming, inviting. Jean, sunk dejectedly in the seat beside the driver so that only the top of his black, crumpled felt hat showed above the high seat, was too engrossed in delightfully painful nostalgia for his New Orleans to notice anything. Mary and her father were eagerly discussing the change in the lives of the Daquins, which to them both seemed so altogether admirable and desirable there was no questioning of its wisdom.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGot to rush right back to Chicago Thursday‚ÅÝ‚Äîelection this fall and two or three important deals‚ÅÝ‚Äîhad to see you get started off right‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù floated in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson‚Äôs crisp tones to Jean.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou were a darling to come all the way to Atlanta,‚Äù gushed Mary.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNothing at all‚ÅÝ‚Äînothing at all,‚Äù declared her father. He pronounced it ‚Äúnothing a-tall.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWanted to see you get introduced in the right circles, too. Gene thinks his Creole crowd‚Äôs stuck-up and exclusive‚ÅÝ‚Äîthese Atlanta Negroes‚Äôll show him a trick or two for fair. Got to get in right‚ÅÝ‚Äîor you‚Äôll never get in.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jean, who squirmed every time <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson familiarly called him ‚ÄúGene,‚Äù found his old hostility to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson, his voice, his ideas, his coarseness, rising higher than ever before. His gratitude to him in the train began to vanish. He wished fervently his father-in-law had remained in Chicago. He hated his high-handed method of interfering in his and Mary‚Äôs and Mimi‚Äôs most private affairs.</p>
			<p>Money‚ÅÝ‚Äîmoney‚ÅÝ‚Äîmoney‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow much is it worth?‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow much can I make out of it?‚ÅÝ‚Äîthese were the first, last and intermediate stages of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson‚Äôs every thought, every statement, every action. I‚Äôll go through with it, thought Jean, but I‚Äôll never let my soul be turned into a money grubber‚Äôs. The resolution, even though he knew it couldn‚Äôt possibly be carried out completely in this new world he was entering, nevertheless gave Jean some comfort.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer waddled down the hall, pushed open the screen door, and slapped with the corner of her gingham apron at the insects which buzzed inside. ‚ÄúThese nasty bugs‚Äôll be the death of me yet,‚Äù she complained to her companion, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝSophronisba King, lean, acidulous, suspicious of all humans and their motives save her own. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing was as curveless as a young sapling as she went around the room giving quick little jabs at the furniture with an oiled cloth, pursuing relentlessly bits of dust which had settled upon the chairs and table and mantelpiece since late afternoon.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHeard the news about that Lizzie Stone?‚Äù she asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer. ‚ÄúYou ain‚Äôt?‚Äù she demanded incredulously when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer shamefacedly admitted she had not. The possession of a juicy morsel which had not yet come to her friend‚Äôs ears caused <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing‚Äôs skinny frame to swell with prideful importance. ‚ÄúWhy, honey, it‚Äôs all over town!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe always seemed to me such a nice, Christian girl‚ÅÝ‚Äîso quiet and respectable‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMis‚Äô Plummer, them‚Äôs the very ones who‚Äôll fool you nine times out of ten‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey go to church and they‚Äôs sweet as pie in the daytime‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut slipping and sliding into all sorts of devilment.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer‚Äôs ears seemed to stretch out from her head in her eagerness to learn the derelictions of Lizzie Stone. ‚ÄúTell me what she‚Äôs done. You know my heart‚Äôs bad and the doctor told me I couldn‚Äôt stand much excitement,‚Äù she pleaded.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know Jerry Reed‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe‚Äôs head of the Royal United Order of Heavenly Reapers?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôCose I do‚ÅÝ‚Äîain‚Äôt I a member of the Ladies Auxil‚Äôry?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know, Mis‚Äô Plummer, I ain‚Äôt one of these no-count women who runs around town meddlin‚Äô in other folks‚Äôs business‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI stays at home and tends to my own bus‚Äôness.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôCose you don‚Äôt, Mis‚Äô King‚ÅÝ‚Äîev‚Äôrybody knows you don‚Äôt gossip. But what‚Äôs Lizzie and Jerry Reed been doing?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll tell you, Mis‚Äô Plummer, though I ain‚Äôt vouching for the truth of it ‚Äôcause I wasn‚Äôt there to see it with my own eyes‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut they tell me they saw Lizzie getting in Jerry Reed‚Äôs automobile down on Auburn Avenue late last Tuesday night‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>and he had all the curtains up</em>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt say! A body‚Äôd think she‚Äôd have mo‚Äô sense than to do her dirt so bold like! I always heard that Jerry Reed wouldn‚Äôt have a girl work for him unless he could get fresh with her. The nerve of her she was at church last Sunday, struttin‚Äô round just as brazen as any fancy woman!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLord, Mis‚Äô Plummer, I don‚Äôt know what‚Äôs gettin‚Äô into these coloured folks‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey gettin‚Äô mo‚Äô like white folks ev‚Äôry day. Comes from workin‚Äô in white folks‚Äô houses and in these here hotels‚ÅÝ‚Äîseein‚Äô all their dirt and thinkin‚Äô they got to do the same things white folks does.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs the God‚Äôs truth! And say, Mis‚Äô King, did you know these new folks is Cath‚Äôlics? Well, they is‚ÅÝ‚Äîtheir name‚Äôs ‚ÄòDay-Quinn‚Äô or ‚ÄòDay-kin‚Äô or something Frenchy like that. He‚Äôs goin‚Äô to work down to the Lincoln Mutual Life Insurance Company‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs the company got them swell offices down Auburn Avenue.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCath‚Äôlics, is they? Any time I hear tell of coloured folks bein‚Äô anything ‚Äôcept Baptists or Methodists I know some white man‚Äôs been tamperin‚Äô with their religion. That‚Äôs what Booker <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> said once and he sho‚Äô did know what he was talkin‚Äô ‚Äôbout.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs the God‚Äôs truth! Wonder where these folks goin‚Äô to church? They tell me down in N‚ÄôAwleens where there‚Äôs so many furriners most anybody can go where they please long‚Äôs they ain‚Äôt black. But they better not try it in Georgia.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs you got a picture, Mis‚Äô Plummer, of any coloured folks no matter what kinda religion they got stickin‚Äô their heads in that ‚ÄòSacred Heart‚Äô church out Peachtree Street? White folks talk about Jesus but the only Jesus they thinkin‚Äô ‚Äôbout‚Äôs got a white skin. An‚Äô the only heaven they want‚Äôs one got a sign on it ten foot high, ‚ÄòNo Niggers Allowed in Here.‚Äô‚Ää‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLord, Mis‚Äô King, there they come. An‚Äô me settin‚Äô here talkin‚Äô. I bet them ‚Äôtaters done boiled to death!‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer rocked briskly in the chair wherein she had rested her weary frame. The needed momentum gained, she heaved her bulky person to her feet and disappeared in the general direction of the kitchen as through the open door <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson‚Äôs hearty voice came: ‚ÄúWell, folks, here we are!‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶</p>
			<p>Mimi and Jean and Mary climbed down from the surrey and entered the house. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer, her potatoes looked after with incredible speed considering her size, greeted them as though she were welcoming them into her own home.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCome right in! Come right in! I know you must be as tired as all-outdoors. My name‚Äôs <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI live right down the street and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson got me to sorter fix things up‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù she poured forth.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing!‚Äù she called. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing hastened from the kitchen, wiping her mouth on the back of her hand as she came, scanning the arrivals from head to foot in one swift, critical‚ÅÝ‚Äîvery critical‚ÅÝ‚Äîglance.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing,‚Äù introduced <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer grandly. ‚ÄúShe was nice enough to help too.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing nodded in rapid succession to the three, adding one for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson though she had seen him only an hour before. He had employed only <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer to clean up the house and arrange everything but it had not been a difficult matter to persuade <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing to assist‚ÅÝ‚Äîit gave both women ample opportunity to examine at their leisure each piece of furniture and to speculate on its probable cost.</p>
			<p>Without taking off her hat, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr>¬ÝDaquin (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer called her <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDay-queen) rushed from room to room of the two-storied house. On the first floor there was a living room, ‚Äúthe parlour,‚Äù to the left as one entered the door, back of that the dining-room and then the kitchen. To the right were steps leading to the floor above, behind them a small room to be used instead of the more formal parlour and dining-room which apparently were opened only when company came. Above stairs were two fairly large bedrooms above the parlour and dining-room, while a small bathroom, its woodwork painted a yellowish white, and a third and smaller bedroom opened on the other side of the narrow hall.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis big front room will be mine,‚Äù decided <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr>¬ÝDaquin, half to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝKing, who had accompanied her on the tour of discovery and appraisement, and half to herself, ‚ÄúJean will sleep in the next room, while Mimi gets the little room off the hall.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat po‚Äô little skinny man downstairs with the funny moustache don‚Äôt seem to have much to say in this house,‚Äù whispered Mis‚Äô King to her companion as they followed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr>¬ÝDaquin. ‚Äú‚Ää‚ÄôTain‚Äôt hard to see who wears the pants in this family.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Like beagles they followed every word, every expression. Their scanty store of information about the new-comers would be sufficient, when amplified during their mutual discussions on the morrow, as foundation of the extensive tales they would bear to eager ears in the neighbourhood.</p>
			<p>Downstairs Mimi sat in the parlour, wearied, but interested in sizing up her new home. She was perched in a huge chair, of brilliantly polished oak, the seat and back of plum coloured damask. The chandelier was of intricately twisted bands of metal painted a dull gold which formed weird and awesome designs on the ceiling in the reflections from the flickering gas lights. Underneath it there sat an oak table with elaborately, fantastically carved legs, covered with a faded tapestry centre-piece. On it rested a fat family album of red plush, a diamond-shaped mirror in the centre. Near it rested an odd-shaped instrument that Mimi longed to examine but which she contemplated from afar for fear of incurring a frown from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson, who was advising or, rather, ordering Jean regarding the steps he must take to ‚Äúget on‚Äù in his new position. The object was of dark polished wood, a long rod serving as a sort of backbone. At the end was a glass partly enclosed with a little wooden fence, on the rod below was a handle. At the other end was a slotted rack. Near this odd object rested a pile of cards. Gently raising herself by her elbows pressed against the arms of the chair, Mimi could see a brightly coloured picture of a mountain scene on the topmost card. She made a mental resolution to explore this mystery at the earliest possible time.</p>
			<p>‚Äú‚Ä¶¬ÝAnd to-morrow morning right after breakfast you‚Äôll go with me to the office, Gene, where I‚Äôll introduce you to Hunter‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe‚Äôs the president of the Lincoln‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWatkins, Jones and the rest of the crowd. They‚Äôre a live bunch‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat is, live for this town but pretty small potatoes up in Chicago, and they‚Äôve got a gold mine insuring all the coloured folks here in the South. I want you to stick to the job‚ÅÝ‚Äîno monkey business or I‚Äôm through, you hear me?‚ÅÝ‚Äîand you‚Äôll make so much money you‚Äôll wonder how you ever managed to stick in that dead old hole of New Orleans.‚Äù</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson‚Äôs words came to Mimi sharply as his voice rose. He took a fat cigar from his pocket, bit the end from it and tossed the severed bit through the open window. She disliked this bossy old man intensely. She looked at Jean, wondering that he so calmly submitted to the dictatorial attitude of the man who, though his father-in-law, was not many years his senior. But Jean heard his words only vaguely, if he heard them at all. He sat beside his wife‚Äôs father on the couch that matched the chair on which Mimi perched and gazed through the window, the thin white curtains opening and closing as a faint breeze stirred them. Somewhere outside, a voice, throaty but rich, plaintively sang of his woes and his ‚Äúblues‚Äù:</p>
			<div class="poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>I‚Äôm jes‚Äô as misabul as I can be,</p>
				<p>I‚Äôm unhappy even if I am free,</p>
				<p>I‚Äôm feelin‚Äô down, I‚Äôm feelin‚Äô blue;</p>
				<p>I wander round, don‚Äôt know what to do.</p>
				<p>I‚Äôm go‚Äôna lay mah haid on de railroad line,</p>
				<p>Let de B.¬Ý&amp; O. come and pacify mah min‚Äô.</p>
			</div>
			<p>The voice died away in the distance but the poignant, nostalgic longing of the unseen singer remained. Jean and Mimi, used to the Creole dilution of the Negro songs, sat straining their ears to catch every note of this barbaric, melancholy wail as it died in the distance, a strange thrill filling them. The swiftly moving tragedy of the song, dying off abruptly as though the singer was too full for further words, stirred them both to the exclusion of all else. Again a voice was heard, this time a woman‚Äôs:</p>
			<div class="poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>These men I love, honey,</p>
				<p>Sho‚Äô do make me tiahed,</p>
				<p>These men I love, honey,</p>
				<p>Sho‚Äô do make me tiahed.</p>
				<p>They got a han‚Äô fulla gimme</p>
				<p>An‚Äô a mouth fulla much oblige.</p>
			</div>
			<p>A loud laugh greeted the end of her song.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHey dere, Babe, what‚Äôcha doin‚Äô?‚Äù called the first voice, and in response to the reply: ‚ÄúNothin‚Äô much. Come on in!‚Äù the two voices mingled in indistinct words, punctuated frequently with laughter, gay, rich and in unison.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGene, are you listening to what I‚Äôm telling you?‚Äù snapped <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson, and Jean came back to realities with a start.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCertainly! Certainly!‚Äù Jean hastened to assure him.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRobertson eyed him suspiciously and then, as the look of apparent interest on Jean‚Äôs face seemed to satisfy him, he continued his instructions. No sooner had be begun again, however, before Jean‚Äôs mind began to wander once more. He hoped fervently the singers would again begin but the warm night wrapped them in its vast silence.</p>
			<p>Mimi welcomed her step-mother, who came briskly down the stairs followed at a respectful distance by her two companions.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúEverything‚Äôs just lovely and I don‚Äôt know really how to thank you, papa,‚Äù she bubbled. ‚ÄúMimi, you‚Äôd better run upstairs and get your face and hands washed. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝPlummer tells me she‚Äôs fixed supper for us and we don‚Äôt want it to get cold. Jean, you and papa‚Äôd better do the same thing and don‚Äôt take all night getting back.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Napoleon, Caesar, Alexander never spoke to common soldiers more brusquely nor with greater assurance that their commands would be obeyed. Nor did it occur to Mimi or Jean to protest‚ÅÝ‚Äîboth were too much under the domination of this person who would never be familiar to either of them.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
